COURS INTRODUCTION

9:00  	Introduction
		- Présentation des participants
		- Background : 
			Assessment reports : MEA, IPCC, LivingPlanetReport, IPBES
			Pereira et al. 2010
				Définition de biodiversity scénarios
				Description de l'étude (figure 1)
				Metrics of change
				Techniques de modélisation
					Land-cover change
					SDMs
					Ecopath
					Dose-response relationships
					DGVMs
				Species extinction
					Fig2
					Variation among scenarios: land and climate change; species ecology; differences in modelling approaches
					Controversy : extinction debt, interactions between drivers
				Conclusions
				Decision making
					"scenarios must move beyond illustrating the potential impacts of global
						change on biodiversity toward more integrated
						approaches that account for the feedbacks that
						link environmental drivers, biodiversity, ecosystem
						services, and socioeconomic dynamics."
			
			Humility : we are pretty bad at predicting local biodiversity changes (Vellend2013)
		- Motivations
		- Attentes du cours
		- Objectifs
		- Contenu
		- Évaluation





9:30 	Étude de cas : Thomas et al. 2004
		- Question de base
			Provide a first pass estimate of extinction probabilities associated with climate change scenarios for 2050. Estimate number of species that are "commited to extinction"
		- Méthodologie
			1 103 animal and plant species
			Estimate current distribution area
			Deux scénarios de dispersion
			Three methods to estimate extinctio based on the SAR
				method 1: changes in the summed distribution areas of all species
				method 2: average proportional loss of the distribution area
				method 3: considers the extinction risk of each species
				IUCN red list
		- Résultats principaux
			Species-level with max climate change extinction to be 21-32% (range of three methods) with universal dispersal and 38-	52% for no dispersal
			Projections vary with methods, organisms and areas of the world
			COmparison with extinctions from habitat losses. Some areas have larger climate change impacts, others are driven by land use	
		- Réactions ?
		- Réponse de Thuiller : Two additional sources of uncertainty
			- different SDMs. Differences may be as strong as between scenarios
			- using the SARs. Link between area reduction and extinction risk is questionable
			- conclusion : the range of extinction risks may even be wider than anticipated 
		- Quelle utilisation faire des prédictions ?
		- Comment faire différent 15 ans plus tard ?

10:00	Discussion : quoi mettre dans un modèle ?
		- Connolly
			Definition of phenomenological model
			E.g.
			Definition of process based model
			Discussion on the strength and weaknesses
		- Urban
			6 processes to model biodiversity
			E.g. of failure because of not enough processes
			E.g. of detailled models
		- Purves
			- description of Madingley
			- E.g. of prediction
			- one model for all ?
			- uncertainty management ?

10:30 	Pause






























11:00	Présentation d'introduction
		- Techniques de base de modélisation
		- The modeling loop (Dietz 2018)		
		- Incertitude : 
			Paramétrisation
				structure hiérarchique de la variabilité dans un modèle de survie d'un arbre (mesure, variabilité annuelle, processus, génétique, conditions locales, conditions de site)				
			Propagation
				exemple avec modèle déterministe vs stochastique de croissance
			Structurelle
				comparaison des scénarios IPBES
		- Présentation du problème de la semaine 

11:30	10 steps guide to ecological modeling

			Precisely define the objective
			Use theory to justify assumptions and manage complexity
			Schematize the model
			Make sure of mathematical rigor
			Proper interpretation of the model, limits and uncertainty 
			Debug the code AND the model
			Code properly and for others
			Keep a journal of model development and tests
			Run virtual experiments
			Model validation & updating
			Have in mind illustration of the results


			Modelling is a state of mind more than a technique. 



A model is a logical machine for deducing the latter from the former. If the model is correct, then, if you believe its assumptions, you must, as a matter of logic, also believe its conclusions. (Gunawardena, 2014. BMC Biology)
--> the whole is not necessarily the sum of the parts





			Modèles phénoménologiques (e.g. SARs)
			Équations différentielles 
			Équations différentielles partielles
			Équations de différence
			Équations différentielles stochastiques
			Chaines de Markov
			Diffusion models
			Metapopulation models
			Leslie
			IPM (e.g. )
			Automates cellulaires (e.g. forest fire)
			Modèles de flux (e.g. Ecopath)
			Modèles individus centrés (e.g. range finder)
			Forest gap models (e.g. SORTIE)
			Réseaux trophiques (e.g. ATN)
			DGVM
			Modèle global d'écosystème (e.g. Madingley)
			SDMs
			Phenofit
			Modèles d'extinction
			Movement
			Dose-response models





10 steps guide to modelling
ou 
10 qualities for a good modeller


Discussion en fin de journée sur la pratique de la modélisation ? 

